# Project 24: Improving functionality and usability of OpenEBench for data-driven research in Life Sciences through Community-led efforts

## Abstract

The proposed project seeks to enhance the functionality and usability of the OpenEBench platform (https://openebench.bsc.es/), as well as foster collaboration and engagement within the ELIXIR communities that are interested in performing a benchmarking evaluation of tools and/or workflows using this framework.

Our first objective is to promote a greater sense of community participation in benchmarking activities. To achieve this, we plan to establish connections between OpenEBench and APICURON, which will provide users with a comprehensive overview of their contributions to their benchmarking activities. For that, APICURON will gather a rich set of metadata in the platform, based on Schema.org and Bioschemas. This will enable contributors’ activities to be exposed in a more detailed view through third party systems, e.g. ORCID.

Our second objective is to encourage participation in benchmarking activities by working on best practices and new processes for onboarding communities. These resources will be included in the OpenEBench documentation (https://openebench.readthedocs.io/) to make the platform more accessible for new users, especially those with less experience in benchmarking activities. In addition, we want to help users in understanding the results generated by OpenEBench, by creating new visualizations and summaries for specific communities. Those available resources will be then exposed via a visualizations gallery.

Overall, our proposal seeks to strengthen the OpenEBench platform and the ELIXIR Communities collaboration. By improving the platform's usability and recognizing individual contributions, we hope to encourage increased participation in benchmarking activities and foster a stronger sense of community.

## More information

OpenEBench is a constantly evolving project that relies on community feedback and collaboration. During the BioHackathon, we plan to gather input from potential users so that we can incorporate best practices for onboarding new communities, as well as new data visualizers for concrete scenarios. 

Also, we want to start an interconnection between APICURON and OpenEBench during the BioHackathon. Therefore, for the project to succeed, we would need the involvement of APICURON and ELIXIR communities (CAID, hCNV and others). 

After the BioHackathon, the work done will continue in some European projects such as, EuCanImage, EUCAIM and PerMedCoE. 

The level of expertise of the participants will be from front-end developers to help us with new data visualizers to experts in APICURON to provide us with a crediting service and, finally, anyone, with any level of expertise, that could help us with the new processes for the onboarding of new communities in OpenEBench.

## Lead(s)

Laura Portell-Silva, Carles Hernandez-Ferrer, Adel Bouhraoua


