# MARS: Multi-omics Adapter for Repository Submissions

## Introduction
MARS is a data brokering system for submitting multi-omics life sciences studies to multiple specialized repositories.
MARS is a versatile and modular Multi-Repository ISA Submission Framework that enables data producers and multiple data repositories to exchange information seamlessly using the same standardized ISA-JSON format. Unlike a centralized platform, MARS operates as a common framework, allowing for decentralized data submissions while ensuring consistent interpretation and validation of ISA-JSON containing metadata across various repositories.
MARS serves as a common ground where data producers and diverse data repositories can interact cohesively, sharing scientific metadata encoded in ISA-JSON format. The framework ensures mutual understanding and accurate interpretation of the data, preserving the important links between multi-omics data generated from the same biological source.

## Components in MARS
MARS is comprised of distinct components, each representing key roles in the data submission process. Together, they form the essential building blocks of MARS, enabling cohesive and reliable data submission to multiple repositories.
Each role performs specific functions and carries distinct responsibilities essential for the smooth operation of the system.

### ISA-JSON producers
This role includes any source of ISA-JSON files containing the metadata of multi-omics research. For example, research infrastructure or service facilities that operate platforms such as ARC, FAIRDOM-SEEK, ISA Creators. 

* Main function: Prepare research metadata in ISA-JSON format (i.e. generate and export ISA-JSON files)
* Responsibilities:
  * Avoid data duplication. For example, not re-submitting already existing data in the target repositories through MARS.
  * Ensure compliance of the submitted ISA-JSON with the ISA model expected by MARS.
  * Conform submitted ISA-JSON to target repositories' additional validation rules validated by MARS. This includes repositories’ checklists, controlled vocabulary lists, ontology terms, etcetera.
  * Assert that files referenced within the ISA-JSON metadata are uploaded to the target repositories. For example, if a FASTQ file is referenced in an assay that would be submitted to ENA, this file should exist within the storage of ENA.
  * Use credentials for submission that the target repositories accept. For example, to submit to ENA, credentials for a submission account of ENA would be required.
 
### Data broker
This role includes a research infrastructure or service facilities that operates a platform designed to streamline the data submission process to repositories. This platform serves as the intermediary element in MARS: facilitating seamless submission of (meta)data to the target repositories. Data brokers play a vital role in ensuring the smooth flow of information within the system, connecting data producers with repositories effectively and securely
* Main function: Submit to the target repositories the provided ISA-JSON 
* Responsibilities: 
  * Deliver the ISA-JSON to the repositories without any loss of information.
  * Extend the ISA-JSON with additional information provided by the archives. For example, the accessions assigned to the submitted objects.
  * Handling the submission process as an intermediary between the producers and repositories.
  * Informing the producers effectively about the status of the submission to the target archives. For example, if there were any errors, and providing the extended ISA-JSON.
  * _TBD: #! once decided on how credentials/token/AAI are handled_
  * To ensure that the brokering account is not used beyond the purposes defined by the producer. In other words, not to modify or submit in the name of the producer without their consent.
The data broker can have an ENA brokering account or not. The data brokering tool or service can be used with a personal account for data repositories.
Data broker reads receipts generated by the repositories and add the information into the ISA-JSON.

## Target Archives
This role includes any omics archive that joins the MARS approach, facilitating a submission through the data broker platform. The goal of MARS is for submissions to these repositories to be made in a similar way through metadata in ISA-JSON files.
* Main function: to ingest an ISA-JSON file and use it to submit the metadata it contains to its own archive
* Responsibilities
  * To maintain a service through which the data brokering platform can send the ISA-JSON
  * To create a process that will transform the received ISA-JSON into a suiting format for the submission of their archive. That is, if the archive does not accept natively ISA-JSON
  * To register the metadata targeted to the archive contained in the ISA-JSON
  * Ensure that the response given to the data broker conforms to the given standards. See https://github.com/elixir-europe/biohackathon-projects-2023/blob/main/27/repository-api.md 

# #! To be discussed:
- Handling brokering accounts: who creates it? Same for all repositories? Who handles requests to broker data? Can it be done automatically? Are all namespaces for submissions would be shared? Check: https://ena-docs.readthedocs.io/en/latest/faq/data_brokering.html

## Diagram
````mermaid
graph TD
    start((START)) --> ISA-JSON
    style start fill:#FFFFFF,stroke:#333,stroke-width:5px
    inform --> endNode{{END}}
    style endNode fill:#E0E0E0,stroke:#333,stroke-width:5px
    subgraph User/JSON Producer
        targetRepo(Define Target repositories) -->|Add comment to ISA| ISA-JSON
        ISA-JSON
        Credentials
        Files
        Files --> |Addition\nof Checksums| ISA-JSON
        fix(Fix error)
        style fix fill:#FF9999,stroke:#333,stroke-width:2px
        inform(Retrieve extended ISA-JSON)
    end

    subgraph Broker platform
        ISA-JSON --> |Upload| isa[ISA-JSON]
        Credentials --> |Upload| credentials[Credentials]
        Files --> |??????| files[Files]
        isa --> validation{Validate\nISA-JSON}
        validation --> |No| fix
        validation --> |Yes| sendIsa(API call)
        style sendIsa fill:#F5F906,stroke:#333,stroke-width:2px
        credentials --> sendIsa
        updatedIsa[Updated ISA-JSON]
        updatedIsa --> sendIsa2(API call)
        style sendIsa2 fill:#F5F906,stroke:#333,stroke-width:2px
        credentials --> sendIsa2
        files --> sendIsa2
        responseDec2 --> |Yes: Extend\nISA-JSON|updatedIsa2
        updatedIsa2[Updated ISA-JSON]
        updatedIsa2 --> extensionBS(Download BioSamples JSON &\nExtend External References)
        extensionBS --> sendIsaBsFinal(API call)
        responseDec1{Correct\nResponse}
        responseDec1 --> |Yes: Extend\nISA-JSON|updatedIsa 
        responseDec1 --> |No| fix
        responseDec2{Correct\nResponse}
        responseDec2 --> |No| fix
        style sendIsaBsFinal fill:#F5F906,stroke:#333,stroke-width:2px
    end

    subgraph BioSamples
        sendIsa --> |Send ISA-JSON| readIsa(Read and Transform ISA-JSON)
        readIsa --> registerBs(Register BioSamples)
        registerBs --> checkBS{Correct\nsubmission}
        checkBS -->|Yes| receipt1[Response with\nBioSample accessions]
        checkBS -->|No| receipt1no[Response with\nerrors]
        receipt1no --> |Send| responseDec1
        style receipt1no fill:#FF9999,stroke:#333,stroke-width:2px
        receipt1 --> |Send| responseDec1
        sendIsaBsFinal --> |Resubmission as \nModification| modifyBiosamples(Modify existing BioSamples)
        modifyBiosamples --> inform
        style BioSamples fill:#92FBA9,stroke:#333,stroke-width:2px,stroke-dasharray: 5, 5
    end

    subgraph Archives
        sendIsa2 --> g_read(Read and Transform ISA-JSON)
        g_read --> g_register(Register objects)
        g_register --> g_check{Correct\nsubmission}
        g_check -->|Yes| g_receipt[Response with\nArchived accessions]
        g_check -->|No| g_receiptno[Response with\nerrors]
        g_receiptno --> |Send| responseDec2
        style g_receiptno fill:#FF9999,stroke:#333,stroke-width:2px
        g_receipt --> |Send| responseDec2
        updatedIsa2
        style Archives fill:#3BF9F9,stroke:#333,stroke-width:2px,stroke-dasharray: 5, 5
    end

    subgraph ArchiveList
        ENA
        MetaboLights
    end

    ArchiveList -.- Archives
````
